Increased user concern over security and privacy on the Internet has led to widespread adoption of HTTPS, the secure version of HTTP. HTTPS authenticates the communicating end points and provides confidentiality for the ensuing communication. However, as with any security solution, it does not come for free. HTTPS may introduce overhead in terms of infrastructure costs, communication latency, data usage, and energy consumption. Moreover, given the opaqueness of the encrypted communication, any in-network value added services requiring visibility into application layer content, such as caches and virus scanners, become ineffective. This paper attempts to shed some light on these costs. First, taking advantage of datasets collected from large ISPs, we examine the accelerating adoption of HTTPS over the last three years. Second, we quantify the direct and indirect
costs of this evolution. Our results show that, indeed, security does not come for free. This work thus aims to stimulate discussion on technologies that can mitigate the costs of HTTPS while still protecting the user’s privacy.

The global race is on to develop 5G, the fifth generation of mobile network. While 5G will follow in the footsteps of 4G and 3G, this time scientists are more excited. They say 5G will be different — very different. "5G will be a dramatic overhaul and harmonization of the radio spectrum," says Prof Rahim Tafazolli who is the lead at the UK's multimillion-pound government-funded 5G Innovation Centre at the University of Surrey. To pave the way for 5G the ITU is comprehensively restructuring the parts of the radio network used to transmit data, while allowing pre-existing communications, including 4G and 3G, to continue functioning. 5G will also run faster, a lot faster. Prof Tafazolli now believes it is possible to run a wireless data connection at an astounding 800Gbps — that's 100 times faster than current 5G testing. A speed of 800Gbps would equate to downloading 33 HD films — in a single second. Samsung hopes to launch a temporary trial 5G network in time for 2018's Winter Olympic Games.

SSL/TLS is the standard protocol for providing authenticity and confidentiality on top of TCP connections. Today,
it is used to provide a secure version of traditional protocols (e.g., IMAP, SMTP, XMPP, etc.); in particular, the usage of HTTP over TLS is commonly known as HTTPS. Each TLS connection begins with a handshake between
the server and the client. In this handshake, the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) suite is used to authenticate the server (and sometimes the client) and to generate cryptographic keys to create a secure channel for data transmission.

A common belief is that deploying HTTPS increases infrastructure costs (to accommodate the resulting computational, memory, and network overhead) in addition to the cost of certificates (up to $1,999/year each1
). Thus, one would expect services to carefully deploy HTTPS only when needed. To test this, we examine recent HTTPS usage trends. We collected per-flow logs from a vantage point monitoring the traffic of about 25,000 residential ADSL customers of a major European residential ISP (“Res-ISP”). The vantage point runs Tstat [7], which implements a classifier supporting both HTTP and TLS identification. For TLS traffic, Tstat parses the ClientHello and ServerHello TLS handshake messages to extract (i) Server Name Indication (SNI), i.e., the hostname to which the client is attempting to connect, and (ii) Subject Common Name (SCN) carried in
the server certificate, i.e., the name the server itself presents. Tstat is also able to identify the presence of SPDY in the TLS connections. In the following, we use this rich ISP dataset to characterize the evolution of HTTPS usage. At the time of writing, HTTPS and HTTP combined represent 75% of all TCP traffic (by volume) in Res-ISP

http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dnaylor/CostOfTheS.pdf